Essential Question: What animals depend on the Teton River and how are they symbolically related?


Podcast 

Lilly: Did you know without raptors and raccoons in Rexburg we would be invaded with pesky rodents? Each animal in the Teton River plays an important role in protecting and preserving species diversity in ways that may surprise you.

Braelyn: Here are some examples of the animals that live along the Teton River watershed and how they are interrelated. 

Emma:  Raccoons and squirrels are small animals that live in the Teton River riparian ecosystem. They are omnivores, preying on other small animals and eating plants. 

Lilly:  Squirrels are also scavengers. Scavengers are important for cleaning up the environment and recycling organic material. Interestingly, … raccoons eat squirrels. 

Braelyn: Raccoons are also known as trash pandas. Unfortunately, raccoons have also been known to eat cats. 
       
Emma: Birds along the Teton River include raptors and songbirds. Raptors, birds of prey, include the red tailed hawk, bald eagle, belted kingfisher, osprey, owl, and the American kestrel. Raptors help keep rodents in check.

Lilly:  Most raptors are large birds, but the American kestrel is the smallest raptor in North America at only 8-10 inches. Songbirds are hunted by owls and hawks. The bald eagle and osprey eat fish, while songbirds eat berries. An important contribution of the songbird is that they distribute seeds. 

Braelyn: White tail deer, mule deer, and moose are herbivores that depend on the Teton River. They eat plants, shrubs, and in the case of the moose, they eat plants under water. They live in the habitat near the river called the riparian ecosystem. 

Emma:  Moose are the largest member of the deer family. They have dark fur, humps, and large antlers, they are much bigger than deer, and may be aggressive toward humans. Deer are tan and have smaller antlers than moose. Mountain lions, coyotes, and black bears prey on deer and moose.

 	James:  Beavers play an important role in establishing and maintaining wetlands. The beavers' predators are foxes, coyotes, bobcats, otters, and great horned owls. Beavers build dams from trees, branches, rocks, and mud. The dams create ponds which store water thereby creating wetland habitat for other species as well as themselves. Beavers are herbivores and in turn eat vegetation that grows in and around the ponds. 

Emma: Trumpeter swans forage for aquatic vegetation in beaver ponds and slow-moving sections of the river. Also, Northern leopard frogs lay their eggs in the still waters of the beaver pond. The beaver is an animal who plays a BIG role in the Teton River ecosystem.

Lilly: Coyotes are omnivores that adapt well to city life. They will eat almost anything! They eat deer, rabbits, chickens, rodents, birds, fish, garbage, and sometimes domestic pets. They are smaller than their relatives, the wolves, but they are bigger than foxes. Coyotes are nocturnal hunters. Free roaming pets such as cats and dogs seem to attract coyotes to neighborhoods. 

 Braelyn: There are some animals that we did not mention in this podcast, however we hope you get the idea that the Teton River riparian area is home to many diverse animal species. 

Protecting and preserving the river is something  we should all do. 
The more we know, the more we care. 
Thanks for caring about the animals of the Teton River watershed!

Emma:  To learn more, you can study from the same sources that we used:
Lilly: DesertMuseum.org Britannica
Braelyn: Bureau of Land Management, Upper Snake Field Office
Emma:  FeedingNature.com and conserve-energy-future.com
Lilly:  kids.nationalgeographic.com 
Emma:  Idaho Fish and Game
