 ``What is the health of the fishery habitat of the Teton River and why is it important to the people of Rexburg?"  
                
Podcast:
 Zeke:  As you walk along the Teton River in Idaho, have you ever seen a fish in the water? Can you name any of the fishes you see? Let’s learn about these quick moving creatures that swim along this waterway

Abigail: Are you a fisherman? Have you ever wondered about the health of the fishery habitat of the Teton River and why it is important to the people of Rexburg? In this podcast you will learn about the types of fishes in the Teton River, and also how they affect the ecosystem.
 	 
Wes: The Teton River has 11 native fish species. The poster child in the Teton River is the Yellowstone Cutthroat Trout. Idaho Regional  Fisheries Manager, Brett High said, “This species is a focus of conservation and management efforts because they only occupy 43% of their native range.” 

That means they are found in less than half the waterways they used to be found in. The Cutthroat Trout has become a symbol of western rivers, and the Teton River is one place where native Cutthroat Trout may still be found.

Nixon: Other fish species in the Teton River include the Mountain Whitefish, a close relative of the trout. You may also find 2 sculpin species. Sculpin are a type of fish that stay at the bottom of a river or lake. There are also 3 sucker species, and 4 minnow species. All of the native fish species are important for the ecosystem because they help to control insects and provide food for other animals. 

Caden: If all the fish were gone, the Teton River would become very unhealthy because it would disrupt the food chain. Thankfully, all of the fish population in this river are mostly healthy and balanced. When native fish are properly managed in the Teton River this enables the ecosystem to function properly. 

Aksel: Non-native fish species in the Teton River include the Brown Trout, Rainbow Trout, and Brook Trout. They may be fun for fishermen to catch, but… they may also be a threat to the   native species in the river.

Abigail:  Idaho Fish and Game Officer Spencer Wesche (weshie) reports, “The cutthroat trout is the species of most concern in the Teton River. The river is one of the last strongholds for pure cutthroat trout populations. This species is hybridizing with rainbow trout in most rivers in the area.”

Aksel: Hybrids can be a problem because they reduce the genetic purity of the feisty Cutthroat Trout. 

Scottie: The Brown Trout have a negative effect on the Cutthroat Trout through competition for food and nesting areas. They also disrupt predation relationships. 

Walter: You may be wondering if there are threats to the fish in the Teton River? Well, I’m glad you asked! Overfishing can disrupt the balance of the river ecosystem.

Agricultural chemicals can be another threat, such as pesticides that can get into the river.  This could be poisonous to many species, including fish!

Zeke: Thankfully, the health of the diverse fish habitat in the Teton River is currently supported by private organizations, government agencies, and responsible individuals like you!
   
If we didn’t have any fish in the Teton River, the ecosystem would be MESSED UP. If you like the ecosystem in Rexburg, do everything you can do to help!

 Scott  If we didn’t have fish - 
we might not have as many animals around. If you like to fish  - 
you should help the fish in the Teton River. 

So get up from your comfy couch. 
Get off  the video games you can’t stop playing, and go to the Teton River as a family and appreciate … those … FISH!!!


Zeke: We’d like to thank….._
Brett High, and Spencer Weshe from Idaho Fish and Game;  
Max Lewis from Friends of the Teton River, and 
Dr. Eric Billman, a professor at Byu-Idaho, who spent a day at the Teton River and many hours in class with us!
 





