Podcast: Teton River Friends 
All: Friends of the river PODCAST!!

Jill: Everyone needs friends! Friendships have a huge impact on our health and happiness. Good friends can relieve stress and provide comfort.

Bryndi: I agree! I need friends, you need friends, everything on the earth needs friends, even the Teton River!

Chase: Wait, wait, wait,....a river needs friends? How can a flowing, changing river have a friend?

Jill: Do you agree that friends impact our health?

Chase: Yes.

Jill: Do you think friends can relieve stress?

Chase: Yes.

Bryndi: Do you think the Teton River deserves to be healthy and have less stress,...stress that can lead to contamination, over use, loss of habitat, and other drastic changes?

Chase: Of course, but I just don’t understand what I can do to be a friend to the Teton River.

Bryndi:There are federal, state and local governments, national organizations, and local groups that support rivers all over the world. Let’s explore a little and find some that apply specifically to the Teton River.

Jill: For example, the Idaho Department of Environmental Quality, otherwise known as IDEQ for short. 

IDEQ’s Water Quality Division makes sure the state’s surface, ground, and drinking water resources meet water quality standards. IDEQ focuses on protecting groundwater from pollution and cleaning up contaminated groundwater. They also provide guidance for managing storm water discharges, so our rivers, lakes and streams are free from pollution.   

Bryndi:Friends of the Teton River (FTR) is a nationally recognized leader in science and community-based watershed protection and restoration. If you go to their website (Tetonwater.org) you will learn that FTR was founded in 2001 by a diverse group of stakeholders, including farmers, anglers, scientists, agency personnel, and conservationists who were concerned by declines in water quality and the Teton River fishery.

The Friends of the Teton River help the river in many ways. One way is through Community education. FTR goes to schools and teaches kids about river ecosystems and conservation. Their goal is to inspire others to help the Teton River. 

Another way they befriend the Teton River is through community restoration projects. On their website, they provide opportunities for the community and general public to see their work and view what they do.


 Chase:The Henry's Fork Foundation is a nonprofit based group in eastern Idaho. According to their website they use a science-based, collaborative approach to promote favorable streamflow, good water quality, healthy fish populations, and a positive fishing experience  in the Henry’s Fork and South Fork Snake River watersheds.
Henry's Fork Foundation’s  primary purpose is to conserve, protect, and restore fish wildlife and their environment. 
But that's not all they do, no no no. They also protect not only the animals, but the river - by helping to insure it is clean and nice for fish to live in. They are very generous, because they have donated to well over 100 research and monitoring projects. Imagine them doing all of this without the use of public funds!
Remember, even though the Henry's Fork foundation might do a lot, it won’t be enough if others don’t pitch in.

Chase: So, how can we help the Teton River stay clean and flowing? We can be the Teton River’s BEST friend! 

Jill: Contact one of these foundations today to find out even more about how you can be a friend to the Teton River!

Bryndi:We would like to thank:
●	IDEQ
●	Friends of the Teton River
●	Henry’s Fork Foundation
●	and Mrs. Barton for helping us and for being a great example.
 
Jill: Thank you for listening to…

Chase: Friends of the river
              
Jill: Friends of the river
    
Bryndi: Friends of the river
     All: PODCAST!!!


