What is the effect of non-native and invasive plants entering the Teton Rivers ecosystem on the native plants and animals?

Brylee     Hello and welcome to the Teton River Botany Group podcast. 

Clayton     As mindful citizens, we should learn about the adverse effects of non-naitive and invasive plants.

Brylee     The plants along the Teton River are essential to the survival of countless fish and animals, but the plants of the Teton river can’t protect themselves without our help, and here’s why. 

Wyatt     The vegetation along the Teton River is highly threatened by invasive plants. Invasive plants out-compete native plants by using up space that is necessary for the survival of naitive species. Many are also not pal-at-a-ble to most animals, because they usually are poisonous or the animals don’t recognize them as food. The most problematic invasive species along the Teton River include the leafy spurge, knapweed, thistle, and ox-eye daisy.

Oscar     So you may ask, why do the naitive plants that live right along the banks of the river matter so much? Well, it is because the plant roots stabilize the soil in the riparian area where the willow tree, birch tree, and the cottonwood trees grow. This stabilization also helps keep sediment from being washed into the river and becoming a pollutant.

Clayton    The plants around the river not only help with erosion control, but they also support wildlife. Wildlife is protected and supported by the plants because the plants give shade, food, and homes for animals that live around the river. According to invasivesspecies.idaho.gov, “Invasive species are highly destructive, and if left unchecked will destroy Idaho’s natural beauty and economy.”

Wyatt     Now back to the concept that invasive species are dangerous to indigenus plants and animals. These non-native species harm the plants of the Teton River by: 

Oscar     
1.	Eating up space that naitive species need to thrive. 
2.	Using resources that are needed by plants around the river.
3.	Some of the invasive plants can poison naitive and domestic animals, and
4.	Invasive plants can spread to our agricultural areas and cause economic damage to both crops and grazing land.

Wyatt     Invasive plants, commonly known as weeds, spread very quickly and can out compete slower growing plants that are important to the health of the Teton River watershed.

Oscar     Invasive plants take essential resources out of the food chain that native plants need to thrive. 

Brylee     We saw a great example right on the Teton River, Luckily it didn’t end up killing all the plants along the bank. The story goes like this:
 
Wyatt     So, one person must have been enjoying the natural beauty of the Teton River while eating an apple. When the apple was almost gone, eaten all the way down to the core, that person must have thought, “Well that's no biggie. I’ll just toss this apple core. It will decompose.”  But little did they think about, there are seeds in that apple! And now, there is an involuntary apple tree growing along the south bank of the Teton River!

Oscar     The bottomline with invasive plants in our ecosystem or any ecosystem is that it decreases biodiversity. This will decrease services the ecosystem provides to other organisms as well as humans.  Invasive plants will disturb food chains and disrupt the riparian habitat causing a negative domino effect to aquatic species, both in the river and along the river, as well as plant life on the banks.

Clayton    This whole time we’ve been telling you the bad news, but what we haven't told you there is good news!!!

			[pause for drum roll]

Brylee     YOU CAN HELP THE TETON RIVER! 
Not only that, but it won’t even be difficult. All you have to do is follow these three rules of thumb:

	1: Wyatt      If you want to go down to the Teton River, or any river, always be sure to make sure there are no seeds stuck to your clothing.

	2: Oscar     Avoid removing native plants or disturbing the soil in and around the Teton River. This might lead to freeing up space for invasive plants to take over. Kochia weed is especially good at stealing open spaces.

	3: Clayton    Now this one is probably the most effective of the three, you can support fundraisers and groups that protect the Teton River.

Wyatt     In conclusion, the Teton River still has time before it succumbs to invasive plants. With your help, the native habitats can be restored.

Oscar     Now that you know how, will you help support the Teton River?

Brylee     Special thanks to 
●	Mr. Travis Phillips, from Madison High School for his help
●	Daniel Call a BYU-Idaho botany student and to professor Gary Baird for spending a day with us along the Teton River and sparking our interest!



			
	

