   Why Care

Aliyah:
Do you use water? Of course you do! Have you ever wondered where it comes from? 
In eastern Idaho, surface water comes from rivers, including the Teton River. The Teton River is 86 miles long. This winding river flows through Teton County, Fremont County, and Madison County, including the city of Rexburg. We are 5th-grade students from Madison Middle School and we live in Rexburg, Idaho. We care about the Teton River, and you should too!

Max:
 Have you ever wondered where the water in your sink, fridge, shower, or just your house in general comes from?  A lot of it comes from the Eastern Snake River Plain Aquifer, one of the most prolific and important aquifers in North America!

An aquifer is a natural underground water storage tank where most wells draw water from. That's right, most of your water is from an aquifer. (yay) 

Anyways, aquifers are not only useful but fascinating.
Without aquifers, lakes would be lower, streams could be dry, flora and fauna could dry up and die,...ya, and we don’t even want to talk about what might happen to us!

So if we are going to continue to shower, hydrate and water our lawns, we definitely want to support aquifer recharging efforts! Go to the Idaho Department of Resources website to learn more about aquifer recharge in our area.

Carli:
Most of the water in the Teton River comes from mountain runoff. The Teton River depends on over 2,600 miles of tributary streams. With all these streams, why does it seem we never have enough water?

Do you know what classifies an area as a desert? A geographic region that receives less than 10” of water annually is a dessert. Most of the Snake River plain receives only 12-13” of moisture a year.

What? Does that mean Rexburg is almost a desert?

The Second  reason we should care about the Teton River is agriculture. Agriculture is farming, that is,... growing field crops such as grains, potatoes, and alfalfa. The Teton River provides surface water for local crops. Idaho produces more potatoes and malting barley than anywhere else in the nation. If the farmers don’t have water for irrigation we wouldn’t be able to farm. We learned from Aaron Dalling, director at the Fremont Madison Irrigation District, that………. most of the water in the Teton River comes from snow melt in the mountains, however this natural runoff is augmented late in the summer with water stored in Island Park Reservoir.
 
This water is used to control flooding and provide late season irrigation.    

Since agriculture is the basis of Rexburg’s economy, we can’t depend solely on pre-cip-it-a-tion to irrigate our crops,… but must rely on the Teton River, it’s tributary streams, reservoirs and the aquifer.

	Sam:
And lastly, the Teton River provides an abundant list of recreational opportunities.

This is definitely a reason we should care about the Teton River!!!

Some of the best fly fishing can be found along the Teton River. Fish such as rainbow, cutthroat, and brook trout are a thrill for anglers.

Some of the Teton River’s largest game animals include deer and elk. Other popular game animals include waterfowl such as ducks and geese. 

Biking and hiking are other recreational activities that are enjoyed along and near the Teton River.

For boaters on the Teton River, wildlife viewing and fishing are two most enjoyable pastimes. This also contributes to the economy of Rexburg

Conclusion:
	So, in conclusion the Teton River is a great place to do many things such as growing potatoes, wheat, barley, and doing fun recreational activities-- Hey wait, aquifers are important too!! Oh, yes how could we forget the aquifers! Anyways, thanks for listening and we would like to say thank you to Mr Rigby and Mr Dalling. Even if you already did care about the Teton River,... we hope now you care even more!
